\begin{refsection} 
 
\chapter{Ion Induced Secondary Electron Emission} \label{chapter:quotas} 
 
\setlength{\epigraphwidth}{4in} 
\epigraph{\textit{``I have not failed. I've just found thousands of ways that don't 
work.''}}{Thomas A. Edison} 
 
\setlength{\epigraphwidth}{4in} 
\epigraph{\textit{``With four parameters I can fit an elephant, and with five 
I can make him wiggle his trunk.''}}{John von Neumann} 
 
\vspace{2em} 
 
When slow ions incident on a surface are neutralized, the excess potential 
energy is passed on to an electron inside the surface, leading to emission of 
secondary electrons. The microscopic description of this process, as well as 
the calculation of the secondary electron yield, is a challenging problem due 
to its complexity as well as its sensitivity to surface properties. One of the 
first quantitative descriptions was articulated in the 1950s by Hagstrum, who 
based his calculation on a parametrization of the density of states of the 
material.  
 
In this chapter, I present a new model for calculating the secondary electron 
yield, derived from Hagstrum's initial approach. After providing a brief 
introduction to the topic in Sec.~\ref{quotas:sec-intro}, 
Sec.~\ref{quotas:sec-see} continues by discussing Hagstrum's model in the 
context of semiconductors, as well as our adjustments to the escape function 
(Sec.~\ref{quotas:sec-escape}) and the introduction of electron cascades 
(Sec.~\ref{quotas:sec-cascades}). In Sec.~\ref{quotas:sec-semiconductors}, I 
compare the results of the model for \ce{He^+} and \ce{Ne^+} ions incident on 
\ce{Ge(111)} and \ce{Si(111)} with those obtained from experiment. Finally, I 
expand the application of the model to metals in Sec.~\ref{quotas:sec-metals}, 
introducing the influence of collective excitations 
(Sec.~\ref{quotas:sec-plasmons}). The chapter concludes by discussing the 
results of the final model, first by comparing the calculated yield spectra 
with experiment (Sec.~\ref{quotas:sec-results_metals}) and performing a 
high-throughput analysis for elemental surfaces covering a large part of the 
periodic table (Sec.~\ref{quotas:sec-high_throughput}).

\newpage 
 
\section{Introduction} \label{quotas:sec-intro} 

Secondary electron emission (SEE) is an important phenomenon where electrons 
of a target material are emitted through the impact of energetic primary 
particles. Such processes lie at the foundation of several techniques for 
characterizing surfaces and play an important role in applications such as 
plasma sputtering deposition~\cite{Depla2006, Depla2009} and plasma display 
panels~\cite{Motoyama2006, Cho2007}. For the case of incident ions, 
measurements of the electron yield $\gamma$ were first performed by 
Hagstrum~\cite{Hagstrum1953,Hagstrum1960}. Although there is a considerable 
need for data on the electron emission from incident ions, e.g. as input for 
models of micro-plasmas~\cite{Kothnur2003, Kothnur2005}, measurements of 
$\gamma$ are limited. This lack of experimental data has led to an increased 
interest in theoretical modeling of ion-induced secondary electron emission. 
 
One of the first quantitative descriptions of the interaction of incident ions 
with a surface was also developed by Hagstrum~\cite{Hagstrum1954, 
Hagstrum1961}, who used a model for the density of states in order to derive 
the yield of secondary electrons emitted from the surface per incoming ion. 
His approach was relatively successful, but required the use of a substantial 
amount of fitting parameters in order to make his simulations match 
experiment. Since then, there have been numerous attempts at improving the 
quantitative modeling of the SEE process. Propst~\cite{Propst1963} calculated 
the Auger matrix elements using a WKB approximation\footnote{Named after Wentzel, Kramers and Brillouin.} for the tunneling process, 
and was one of the first to consider electron-electron interactions for the 
secondary electrons. Several authors~\cite{Almulhem1989, Lorente1994, 
Monreal1995} have used a jellium model to calculate the Auger neutralization 
rate for aluminum and sodium, for which the electrons are well described by a 
free electron gas. More recently, Cho et al.~\cite{Cho2007} have used 
first-principles density functional theory (DFT) calculations in combination 
with Hagstrum's model to determine the SEE coefficients for \ce{MgO}. However, 
they used parameters which were fitted for a specific ion-surface combination 
(\ce{He^+} $\rightarrow$ \ce{Ge}) and applied them as if they were fixed 
parameters of the model. A nice overview of the various theoretical models 
used to describe the neutralization of incoming ions on a surface can be found 
in a recent review paper by Monreal~\cite{Monreal2014}.
 
Our approach is to make several adjustments to Hagstrum's model in order to 
reduce its dependency on fitting parameters and improve the calculated yield 
spectra. In this way, we aim to provide a quantitative approach to calculating 
the secondary electron emission from surfaces bombarded by slow ions. Similar 
to Cho et al., we use first-principles density functional theory calculations 
to acquire the necessary input, using the workflow described in 
Sec.~\ref{automation:sec-surface}. 
 
\section{Semiconductors} \label{quotas:sec-see} 

Secondary electron emission from incident ions can be the result of either 
kinetic or potential emission mechanisms~\cite{Burgdorfer2007}. For the 
former, the emission process is driven by the kinetic energy of the incoming 
ion. Potential electron emission, on the other hand, transfers the potential 
energy of the incoming ion to an electron that can then be emitted.  For slow 
moving ions, the potential emission mechanism is dominant~\cite{Aumayr2007}. 
Following Hagstrum's description, it is performed using a two-electron Auger 
process. Here, a distinction must be made between Auger neutralization (AN) 
and resonance neutralization (RN) followed by Auger de-excitation (AD), see 
Fig.~\ref{quotas:fig-auger}. For AN, an electron from the surface material 
tunnels directly into the lowest unoccupied state of the incoming ion. The 
energy released in this transition is passed to another electron in the 
material. This electron, in turn, has a probability of escape if it is excited 
to a state with an energy above the vacuum level. In the case of RN, an 
electron from the surface tunnels into an excited state of the incoming ion, 
after which the atom returns to the ground state by AD. For slow incident 
\ce{He^+} and \ce{Ne^+} ions on \ce{Ge(111)} and \ce{Si(111)}, the resonant 
neutralization channel is unavailable~\cite{Hagstrum1961, Lorente1994}, so we 
can safely disregard the RN and AD processes in our discussion for now. 

{
\tikzset{every picture/.style={scale=0.95, font=\sffamily}}
\begin{figure*}[ht] 
    \centering 
    \begin{subfigure}[t]{0.3\textwidth} 
        \centering 
        \input{figures/quotas/ion_neutralization.tex}
        \caption{} 
    \end{subfigure}% 
    ~ \hspace{1em} 
    \begin{subfigure}[t]{0.3\textwidth} 
        \centering 
        \input{figures/quotas/resonance_neutralization.tex}
        \caption{} 
    \end{subfigure} 
    ~ \hspace{1em} 
    \begin{subfigure}[t]{0.3\textwidth} 
        \centering 
        \input{figures/quotas/auger_deexcitation.tex}
        \caption{} 
    \end{subfigure}% 
    \caption{\label{quotas:fig-auger}Schematic representations of the Auger 
neutralization (a), resonance neutralization (b) and Auger de-excitation (c) 
processes. For the de-excitation, the set of full and dashed arrows each 
represent one possible way via which the de-excitation can occur.} 
\end{figure*} 
}

\subsection{Hagstrum's model} \label{quotas:sec-hagstrum} 
 
I begin by presenting Hagstrum's quantitative description of ion-based SEE 
for semiconductor surfaces, before discussing our adjustments in the sections 
that follow. During the Auger neutralization, an electron tunnels through the 
surface barrier to the lowest unoccupied ionic state, transferring the excess 
energy to a secondary electron of the surface material 
(Fig.~\ref{quotas:fig-auger} (a)): 
\begin{equation} \label{quotas:eq-energyconv} 
\varepsilon_1 + \varepsilon_2 \rightarrow \varepsilon + \varepsilon_0 - E_I. 
\end{equation} 
Here, $\varepsilon_1$ and $\varepsilon_2$ are the initial energies of the 
electrons of the surface, $\varepsilon$ is the energy of the excited Auger 
electron, $\varepsilon_0$ is the vacuum level, and $E_I$ the ionization energy 
of the incoming ion. Determining the transition rates of the various possible 
transitions of the Auger neutralization process involves the calculation of the 
matrix elements in Fermi's golden rule: 
\begin{equation} \label{quotas:eq-fermi} 
    \Gamma_{i\rightarrow f} = \frac{2\pi}{\hbar} \left| H_{i\rightarrow 
f}\right|^2 N(\varepsilon) , 
\end{equation} 
where $N(\varepsilon)$ is the density of states at the final electron energy, 
$\hbar$ is the reduced Planck constant and $H_{i\rightarrow f}$ is the 
transition matrix element: 
\begin{equation} 
    H_{i\rightarrow f} = \int \int u^*_g(\mathbf{r}_1) u^*_e(\mathbf{r}_2) 
V(\mathbf{r}_1, \mathbf{r}_2) u_v'(\mathbf{r}_2) u_v''(\mathbf{r}_1) 
d\mathbf{r}_1 d\mathbf{r}_2, 
\end{equation} 
with $ u_v'(\mathbf{r}_2)$ and $ u_v''(\mathbf{r}_1)$ the initial states of 
the electrons in the valence band, $u_g(\mathbf{r}_1)$ the ground state of the 
neutralized ion, and $u_e(\mathbf{r}_2)$ the excited state of the Auger 
electron, where * denotes the complex conjugate. The interaction potential 
$V(\mathbf{r}_1, \mathbf{r}_2)$ is the Coulomb potential. 
 
Instead of explicitly calculating the secondary emission yield from the 
transition matrix elements, as in the earlier work of e.g. Cobas and 
Lamb~\cite{Cobas1944}, Hagstrum introduced a model based on the density of 
states (DOS) of the surface. In his approach, the matrix element for each 
transition is considered to be constant, which means that the probability that 
an electron of energy $\varepsilon$ will participate in the Auger 
neutralization is proportional to the density of states $N(\varepsilon)$. In 
this way, we can simply use the density of states of the surface to calculate 
the probability that a secondary electron with kinetic energy $\varepsilon_k = 
\varepsilon - \varepsilon_0$ is emitted from the impact of an incoming ion. 
First, the internal distribution of excited electrons $N_i(\varepsilon)$ is 
calculated by 
\begin{equation} \label{quotas:eq-excite} 
N_i(\varepsilon) = \ddfrac{D_c(\varepsilon)T\left[\frac{\varepsilon + 
\varepsilon_0 - E_I}{2}\right]}{\int_{\varepsilon_c}^\infty D_c 
(\varepsilon)T\left[\frac{\varepsilon + \varepsilon_0 - 
E_I}{2}\right]d\varepsilon}, 
\end{equation} 
where $D_c$ is the density of the unoccupied states of the surface, 
$\varepsilon_c$ the bottom of the conduction band, and $T$ is the Auger 
transform: 
\begin{equation} 
\begin{aligned} 
T\left[\frac{\varepsilon + \varepsilon_0 - E_I}{2}\right] = 
\int_{\Delta\varepsilon_v}\int_{\Delta\varepsilon_v} D_v (\varepsilon_1) D_v 
(\varepsilon_2) \hspace{3em} \\ \delta(\varepsilon - \varepsilon_1 - 
\varepsilon_2 + \varepsilon_0 - E_I) d\varepsilon_1 d\varepsilon_2. 
\end{aligned} 
\end{equation} 
Here, $D_v(\varepsilon)$ is the density of the valence states, 
$\Delta\varepsilon_v$ is the valence band width, and $\delta$ is the Dirac 
delta function. Note that $N_i(\varepsilon)$ is normalized to unity because of 
the assumption that every incoming ion is neutralized, producing one excited 
electron inside the surface. The delta function is used to assert energy 
conservation of the Auger neutralization process 
(Eq.~\ref{quotas:eq-energyconv}). \\ 
 
Next, the distribution of the electrons that can escape from the surface 
$N_0(\varepsilon)$ is calculated by multiplying $N_i(\varepsilon)$ with the 
aptly named escape probability $P_e(\varepsilon)$: 
\begin{equation} 
N_0(\varepsilon) = P_e (\varepsilon) N_i (\varepsilon). 
\end{equation} 
Hagstrum modeled the escape probability $P_e(\varepsilon)$ using a 
semiclassical approach, where an electron is considered to be able to escape 
when the projection of its wave vector on the axis perpendicular to the 
surface is large enough, i.e. when its corresponding energy is larger than the 
vacuum level. The resulting escape probability is: 
\begin{equation} \label{quotas:eq-escape} 
\begin{aligned} 
P_e(\varepsilon) &= \frac{1}{2}\left[1 - 
\left(\frac{\varepsilon_0}{\varepsilon}\right)^\beta\right]^\alpha & 
\text{for} \hspace{1em}\varepsilon \geq \varepsilon_0, \\ 
&= 0 &\text{for} \hspace{1em}\varepsilon < \varepsilon_0 
\end{aligned} 
\end{equation} 
where $\alpha$ and $\beta$ represent an anisotropy of the distribution of the 
initial direction of the wave vector of the electron after excitation. In 
Hagstrum's approach, these are parameters which are fitted for each 
ion-surface combination.  Finally, the secondary electron yield $\gamma$, i.e. 
the amount of electrons emitted per incoming ion, is calculated by integrating 
the distribution of escaped electrons: 
\begin{equation} \label{quotas:eq-yield} 
\gamma = \int_{\varepsilon_0}^\infty N_0(\varepsilon) d\varepsilon. 
\end{equation} 
Using his model, Hagstrum was able to fairly accurately reproduce the yield 
spectra for \ce{He^+} and \ce{Ne^+} incident on \ce{Ge(111)} and \ce{Si(111)}. 
Note that all energies in Eq.~\ref{quotas:eq-escape} are defined with respect 
to the valence band minimum, which was taken as the zero-energy level by 
Hagstrum. This corresponds to implicitly deciding on a reference level that 
determines the effective barrier $\varepsilon_0$ that the electrons have to 
pass in order to escape from the surface. Because this reference level affects 
the probability that an excited electron is emitted, it has a significant 
influence on the calculated yield.\\ 
 
Although Hagstrum's description of the SEE process was a major step forward, 
providing an insightful interpretation of his experimental results, he was 
forced to rely on several fitting parameters in order to be able to reproduce 
the experimental spectra. Hagstrum had to parameterize the density of states, 
ionization energy, as well as fit $\alpha$ and $\beta$ in the escape function 
(Eq.~(\ref{quotas:eq-escape})). In our approach, we calculate the density of 
states from first principles within the DFT framework and remove the parameter 
dependency of the escape function as described in 
Sec.~\ref{quotas:sec-escape}. For the ionization energy $E_I$, we shift the 
ionization energy of the free atom with the image interaction (2 
\si{\electronvolt})~\cite{Baragiola1996, Riccardi2003}. Finally, we introduce 
electron-electron scattering as a cascade process in order to improve the 
calculated yield spectra (Sec.~\ref{quotas:sec-cascades}).\\ 
 
By virtue of using Hagstrum's model, we are able to include the 
first-principles calculated electronic structure of the surface, as directly 
calculating the full matrix elements in Eq.~\ref{quotas:eq-fermi} from the DFT 
wave functions would not be computationally feasible. Several such 
calculations have been performed for jellium-model wave functions, but this 
approach would in turn not provide a good description for a semiconductor, nor 
does it allow us to include the electronic structure of the chosen surface. 
Gloebl et al.~\cite{Goebl2011, Goebl2013} and Vald\`es et 
al.~\cite{Valdes2006} did calculate the Auger Neutralization rate by 
considering the matrix elements for the neutralization using a linear 
combination of atomic orbitals (LCAO) and various distances and positions of 
an incoming \ce{He+} ion on several metals and \ce{Ge}. The electronic 
response of the surface was modeled using the response function, once again 
calculated from the jellium model. They found that the Auger rate was not 
sensitive to the position of the incoming ion at short distances for \ce{Ge}, 
which indicates that considering constant matrix elements is a reasonable 
approximation for \ce{Ge}. However, they also found that for noble metals, the 
presence of d electrons in the valence band that can neutralize the incoming 
ion has a large effect on the AN rate. The efficient contribution of $d$ 
electrons compared to $s$ or $p$ states will have to be considered in case the 
model is extended to be applied to noble metals. 
 
\subsection{The Escape Function} \label{quotas:sec-escape} 
 
An integral part of Hagstrum's model is the escape probability function 
$P_e(\varepsilon$), which represents the probability that an electron at 
energy $\varepsilon$ can escape from the surface after excitation. Initially 
Hagstrum had derived a parameterless expression for $P_e$, based on an 
isotropic angular distribution of the wave vector of the excited electrons. 
However, the resulting distributions of escaped electrons, or yield spectra, 
did not have sufficient electrons, especially at lower energies. For this 
reason, Hagstrum introduced the parameters $\alpha$ and $\beta$ (see 
Eq.~(\ref{quotas:eq-escape})), representing an anisotropy of the initial 
direction of the wave vector of the electron. By fitting these parameters, 
Hagstrum was able to adjust the escape function and increase the secondary 
electron yield. Because $\alpha$ and $\beta$ are fitted for each ion/surface 
combination, however, the use of the escape probability of Hagstrum's model is 
ill suited for any model that aims to determine the secondary electron 
emission without relying on experimental input. The approach of Motoyama et 
al.~\cite{Motoyama2006} and Cho et al.~\cite{Cho2007}, who simply used the 
fitted parameters for He$^+$ ions incident on Ge and applied them to other 
systems, is questionable at best. Finally, Hagstrum's expression for the 
escape function depends on where we set the zero-energy level. Here, Hagstrum 
defined all energies with respect to the bottom of the valence band, which 
results in a low probability of escape due to the relatively large surface 
barrier.\\ 
 
Instead of Hagstrum's expression for the escape function, we choose to take a 
quantum mechanical step-barrier approach similar to that of Lorente et 
al~\cite{Lorente1994}. In this framework, the surface is described as a step 
function barrier, and the angle-dependent escape probability is derived from 
the transmission coefficient: 
\begin{equation} 
P_e(\varepsilon, \theta) = T(k_\perp,p_\perp), 
\end{equation} 
where $\theta$ is the angle between the initial wave vector and the surface 
normal, and $k_\perp$ and $p_\perp$ are the projections of the wave vector on 
the surface normal inside and outside of the material, i.e. $k_\perp = k 
\cos(\theta)$. For semiconductors, the barrier is set equal to the electron 
affinity $\chi$~\cite{Baragiola1993, Aboelfotoh1977, Yoon2001}, which 
corresponds to setting the reference energy level at the bottom of the 
conduction band $\varepsilon_c$. Using this convention, the wave vector is 
calculated from 
\begin{equation}\label{quotas:eq-wavevector} 
k=\sqrt{2 m_e (\varepsilon - \varepsilon_c)/\hbar^2}, 
\end{equation} 
where $\varepsilon_c$ is the bottom of the conduction band, $\hbar$ is the 
reduced Planck constant and $m_e$ is the electron mass. $p_\perp$ is 
determined using the refraction condition at the surface: 
\begin{equation}\label{quotas:eq-refraction} 
\frac{\hbar^2 k_\perp^2}{2 m_e} - \chi = \frac{\hbar^2 p_\perp^2}{2 m_e}. 
\end{equation} 
For a step-barrier, the transmission coefficient is given 
by~\cite{Lorente1994}: 
\begin{equation} 
T(k_\perp,p_\perp) = \frac{4k_\perp p_\perp}{(k_\perp + p_\perp)^2}. 
\end{equation} 
Next, in order to determine the escape probability for an excited electron 
with energy $\varepsilon$, we use the following 
expression~\cite{Hagstrum1954}: 
\begin{equation} 
P_e(\varepsilon) = \int P_e(\varepsilon,\theta) P_{\Omega}(\varepsilon) 
d\Omega, 
\end{equation} 
where $P_{\Omega}(\varepsilon)d\Omega$ is the probability that an electron 
with energy $\varepsilon$ has a wave vector \textbf{k} with a direction that 
is part of the solid angle $d\Omega = \sin{\theta} d\theta d\varphi$. If, 
similar to Hagstrum's initial approach, we assume this distribution to be 
isotropic, i.e. $P_{\Omega}(\varepsilon) = 1/4\pi$, and only consider the half 
sphere in the direction of the vacuum, we obtain: 
\begin{equation} 
P_e(\varepsilon) = \frac{1}{4\pi} \int_{0}^{2\pi} d\varphi 
\int_0^{\frac{\pi}{2}} \sin{\theta} d\theta\frac{4k_\perp (\theta) p_\perp 
(\theta)}{(k_\perp (\theta) + p_\perp(\theta))^2}. 
\end{equation} 
This expression for the escape function has the advantage that it does not 
depend on the position of the zero point on the energy axis, since it is 
calculated using a difference of energy values, i.e. $\varepsilon - 
\varepsilon_c$ in Eq.~(\ref{quotas:eq-wavevector}). Moreover, by adopting an 
isotropic angular distribution for the wave vector of the excited electrons, 
we avoid the use of the parameters $\alpha$ and $\beta$. 
 
\resultsubsection{Electron Cascades \label{quotas:sec-cascades}}{https://github.com/mbercx/phd-thesis/tree/master/jupyter/quotas\#electron-cascades}{semiconductors} 
 
Using the escape function described in the previous section, we face a similar 
problem as Hagstrum did when he first considered an isotropic distribution for 
the wave vectors of the excited electrons: the obtained yield spectra are too 
low, largely due to an insufficient amount of electrons at lower kinetic 
energies. This can be seen in Fig.~\ref{quotas:fig-iterations}, where we have 
plotted the kinetic energy distribution of the electrons emitted by the 
initial Auger neutralization. However, the low-energy electrons in the 
experimental yield spectra are often ascribed in the literature to a mechanism 
that Hagstrum did not consider in his model, i.e. electron cascades via 
electron-electron interactions. One of the first to implement this idea was  
Propst~\cite{Propst1963}, who started from the distribution of electrons that 
did not escape after the Auger excitation, and allowed these electrons to 
interact with other electrons in the system through scattering events, once 
again producing electrons that can escape from the surface. He found that 50 
\% of the final yield was produced by the electron cascade process, making it 
an important contribution to the total yield. The concept has also been 
considered more recently by other authors, who first described it as an 
electron cascade process due to its iterative nature. According to Lorente et 
al.~\cite{Lorente1995}, the cascading electrons can account for 60\% of the 
total secondary electron emission. Moreover, the electron cascades are found 
to be the source of the low energy electrons often missing in the calculated 
yield spectra of computational models.\\ 
 
We introduce our own model for the electron cascade process. Similar to the 
approach Hagstrum used to calculate the distribution of excited electrons from 
the neutralization of the incoming ion, we base our implementation of the 
electron cascades on the energy distributions of the interacting electrons. We 
begin by considering the energy distribution of the electrons that cannot 
escape: 
\begin{equation} 
N_c^{(2)}(\varepsilon) = (1-P_e(\varepsilon))N_i(\varepsilon). 
\end{equation} 
In Hagstrum's model, these electrons simply do not contribute, and their 
energy has no influence on the SEE yield. Here, we approximate the scattering 
process using similar assumptions as Hagstrum made for the Auger 
neutralization, i.e. by considering the matrix elements of the transition to 
be constant, which makes the probability of a specific scattering event 
proportional to the density of states at the energy levels involved. The 
scattering process can be written as: 
\begin{equation}\label{quotas:eq-scattering} 
\varepsilon_1 + \varepsilon_2 \rightarrow \varepsilon + \varepsilon'. 
\end{equation} 
where $\varepsilon_1$ is the energy of the excited electron before scattering, 
$\varepsilon_2$ is the energy of an electron in the valence band and 
$\varepsilon$, $\varepsilon'$ are the energies of the two electrons after the 
scattering process (See Fig.~\ref{quotas:fig-cascades}). The distribution of 
excited electrons after scattering can then be calculated using: 

\begin{figure}[ht] 
\centering 
\captionsetup{width=0.9\textwidth}
\input{figures/quotas/electron_scattering} 
\caption{\label{quotas:fig-cascades}Energy diagram of a single step in the 
electron cascade process. The electron at energy $\varepsilon_1$ scatters on 
an electron in the valence band at energy $\varepsilon_2$, transferring 
sufficient energy for the second electron to excite into an unoccupied state 
of the conduction band at energy $\varepsilon'$.} 
\end{figure} 

\begin{equation} 
\begin{aligned} 
N_i^{(2)}(\varepsilon) &\sim \int_{\varepsilon_c}^{\infty} d\varepsilon' 
\int_{\varepsilon_0}^{\infty} d\varepsilon_1 \int_{\Delta_{\varepsilon_v}} 
d\varepsilon_2  D_c(\varepsilon) D_c(\varepsilon') N_c^{(2)}(\varepsilon_1) 
D_v(\varepsilon_2)  \delta(\varepsilon + \varepsilon' -\varepsilon_1 - 
\varepsilon_2) \\ 
&= D_c(\varepsilon) \int_{\varepsilon_c}^{\infty} d\varepsilon' 
D_c(\varepsilon') \int_{\varepsilon_0}^{\infty} d\varepsilon_1 
\int_{-\infty}^{\infty} d\varepsilon_2 N_c^{(2)}(\varepsilon_1) 
D_v(\varepsilon_2)  \delta(\varepsilon + \varepsilon' -\varepsilon_1 - 
\varepsilon_2) \\ 
&= D_c(\varepsilon) \int_{\varepsilon_c}^{\infty} d\varepsilon' 
D_c(\varepsilon') \int_{\varepsilon_0}^{\infty} d\varepsilon_1 
N_c^{(2)}(\varepsilon_1) D_v(\varepsilon + \varepsilon' - \varepsilon_1) \\ 
&= D_c(\varepsilon) \int_{\varepsilon_c}^{\infty} d\varepsilon' 
D_c(\varepsilon') T_{ee}(\varepsilon, \varepsilon'). 
\end{aligned} 
\end{equation} 
Where we have defined the scattering transform $T_{ee}(\varepsilon, 
\varepsilon')$ as 
\begin{equation} 
\begin{aligned} 
T_{ee}(\varepsilon, \varepsilon') = \int_{\varepsilon_0}^{\infty} 
d\varepsilon_1 N_c^{(2)}(\varepsilon_1) D_v(\varepsilon + \varepsilon' - 
\varepsilon_1), 
\end{aligned} 
\end{equation} 
Note that we only consider the excited electrons of $N_c^{(2)}(\varepsilon)$ 
above the vacuum energy, as electrons with less energy can no longer produce 
electrons that can contribute to the secondary electron yield. Finally, 
because every scattering event results in two excited electrons, we normalize 
the new distribution of excited electrons to two times the number of electrons 
above the vacuum energy, prior to the scattering event: 
\begin{equation} 
N_i^{(2)}(\varepsilon) = 2 n_i \ddfrac{D_c(\varepsilon) 
\int_{\varepsilon_c}^{\infty} d\varepsilon' D_c(\varepsilon') 
T_{ee}(\varepsilon, \varepsilon')}{\int_{\varepsilon_c}^{\infty} d\varepsilon 
D_c(\varepsilon) \int_{\varepsilon_c}^{\infty} d\varepsilon' D_c(\varepsilon') 
T_{ee}(\varepsilon, \varepsilon')}, 
\end{equation} 
where 
\begin{equation} 
n_i = \int_{\varepsilon_0}^{\infty} N_c^{(2)} (\varepsilon') d\varepsilon'. 
\end{equation} 
 
In order to simulate the cascade process, these steps are iterated by once 
again considering the spectrum of the electrons which cannot escape and 
calculating the next energy distribution of excited electrons. These 
iterations continue until the yield difference between two iterations is 
smaller than 0.001 electrons per ion. At the final iteration step, we add the 
distributions of the yield that are obtained for each iteration to the 
original yield from Hagstrum's model. If we apply this approach to the yield 
calculation of He$^+$ ions on \ce{Ge(111)}, we obtain the results in 
Fig.~\ref{quotas:fig-iterations}, where we have plotted the number of emitted 
electrons $N_0$ versus their kinetic energy $\varepsilon_k$ for several 
iterations. We can see that as we iterate the electron cascade process, the 
SEE spectrum quickly converges. The final distribution (iteration 3) has 
significantly more electrons at lower energies, and is a substantial 
improvement upon the initial yield distribution after Auger neutralization, 
when compared with the experimental results from Hagstrum~\cite{Hagstrum1960}. 
 
\begin{figure}[ht] 
\centering 
\captionsetup{width=0.9\textwidth}
\includegraphics[width=0.5\linewidth]{Figures/quotas/Fig3.eps} 
\caption{\label{quotas:fig-iterations} Calculated distribution of the kinetic 
energy $\varepsilon_k$ of secondary electrons emitted for incident \ce{He^+} 
ions on \ce{Ge(111)} at various iterations of the electron cascade process.} 
\end{figure} 

\resultsubsection{Comparison with experiment\label{quotas:sec-semiconductors}}{https://github.com/mbercx/phd-thesis/tree/master/jupyter/quotas\#comparison-with-experiment}{semiconductors} 

The resulting yield spectra for incoming \ce{He^+} and \ce{Ne^+} ions on the 
reconstructed \ce{Ge(111)} and \ce{Si(111)} surfaces are plotted alongside the 
experimental results of Hagstrum~\cite{Hagstrum1960} in 
Fig.~\ref{quotas:fig-results_semiconductors}. In his work, Hagstrum measured 
the total yield and kinetic energy distribution of the emitted electrons for 
several energies of the incoming ion on atomically clean, annealed (111) 
surfaces of \ce{Ge} and \ce{Si}. For the experimental results, we 
compare our calculated spectra with the results for low energy 
(10~\si{\electronvolt}) ions, for which the contribution of kinetic electron 
emission is negligible, as it is not considered in our model. 
Overall, the shape of the calculated yield spectra matches reasonably well 
with the experimental one\footnote{Note that we have applied a small gaussian 
broadening to the final calculated yield spectra. This is largely for visual purposes, i.e. to facilitate 
the comparison between different spectra.}. 
The total SEE yield coefficients $\gamma$, obtained s
by integrating the yield spectra (Eq.~(\ref{quotas:eq-yield})), are given in 
Table~\ref{quotas:tab-yield_semiconductors}. For both \ce{Si} and \ce{Ge}, the 
yield coefficients are larger for \ce{He^+} than for \ce{Ne^+}, due to the 
larger ionization energy of helium. The yield is also found to 
be lower for \ce{Si(111)} than \ce{Ge(111)}. The calculated yield coefficients 
are in fair agreement with the experimental values, with a slight 
overestimation for \ce{He^+} on \ce{Ge(111)} and underestimation for 
all other ion/surface pairs. 

\begin{figure*}[ht] 
    \centering 
    \captionsetup{width=0.9\textwidth}
    \begin{subfigure}[t]{0.49\textwidth} 
        \centering 
        \includegraphics[width=\textwidth]{Figures/quotas/Fig4a.eps} 
    \end{subfigure}% 
    ~  
    \begin{subfigure}[t]{0.49\textwidth} 
        \centering 
        \includegraphics[width=\textwidth]{Figures/quotas/Fig4b.eps} 
    \end{subfigure} 
    \begin{subfigure}[t]{0.49\textwidth} 
        \centering 
        \includegraphics[width=\textwidth]{Figures/quotas/Fig4c.eps} 
    \end{subfigure}% 
    ~  
    \begin{subfigure}[t]{0.49\textwidth} 
        \centering 
        \includegraphics[width=\textwidth]{Figures/quotas/Fig4d.eps} 
    \end{subfigure} 
    \caption{\label{quotas:fig-results_semiconductors} Experimental and 
calculated yield spectra for incoming \ce{He^+} and \ce{Ne^+} ions on 
\ce{Ge(111)} and \ce{Si(111)} surfaces. Also shown are the initial yield 
spectra, i.e. without the addition of the electron cascades process described 
in Sec.~\ref{quotas:sec-cascades}, as well as the calculated yield spectra 
when the vacuum level is adjusted using the experimental values for the work 
function in Table~\ref{quotas:tab-workfunction}.} 
\end{figure*} 

\begin{table}[ht] 
\centering 
\captionsetup{width=0.9\textwidth}
\caption{Calculated work functions $\phi$, compared with those calculated by 
De Waele et al. ($\phi_{ref}$)~\cite{DeWaele2018} and experimental values 
($\phi_{exp}$).} 
\label{quotas:tab-workfunction} 
\renewcommand{\arraystretch}{1.3} 
\begin{tabular}{c @{\hskip 2em} c @{\hskip 2em} c @{\hskip 2em} c} 
\hline 
Surface & $\phi$ (\si{\electronvolt}) & $\phi_{ref}$ (\si{\electronvolt}) & 
$\phi_{exp}$ (\si{\electronvolt})\\\hline 
\ce{Ge(111)} & 4.548 & 4.569 & 5.00$^{a}$ \\ 
\ce{Si(111)} & 4.902 & 4.889 & 4.79$^{b}$ \\\hline 
\multicolumn{4}{l}{$^a$ Polycrystalline sample from 
Michaelson.~\cite{Michaelson1977}}\\ 
\multicolumn{4}{l}{$^b$ Averaged value from Kawano.~\cite{Kawano2008}} 
\end{tabular} 
\end{table} 
 
For \ce{Ge(111)}, the high energy tail of the calculated spectrum is shifted 
slightly to higher energies, whereas for \ce{Si(111)}, the tail is shifted in 
the opposite direction. These discrepancies can be attributed to the error on 
the calculated work function, which are compared with experiment for the 
\ce{Si(111)} and \ce{Ge(111)} surfaces in Table~\ref{quotas:tab-workfunction}. 
We can see that the calculated work function is lower than the experimental 
result for \ce{Ge(111)} and slightly higher for \ce{Si(111)}. Because the 
vacuum level determines the probability that an excited electron can escape, 
the work function has an important influence on the calculated yield. This 
influence becomes clear when we look at the yield spectra calculated when 
adjusting the vacuum level to the experimental work function, also plotted in 
Fig.~\ref{quotas:fig-results_semiconductors}. It is clear that by increasing 
the work function of \ce{Ge(111)} to the experimental result, the tail of the 
calculated yield spectrum for both \ce{He^+} and \ce{Ne^+} shifts to lower 
energies, slightly below the tail of the experimental spectrum. For 
\ce{Si(111)} the difference between the calculated and experimental work 
function is smaller, leading to only a minor shift in the spectra. It should 
be noted that although the use of the experimental work function leads to an 
improvement of the calculated yield spectra for the results presented here, 
the experimental results for the work function can vary significantly, 
approximately with the same magnitude as the expected inaccuracy on \textit{ab 
initio} calculated work functions~\cite{DeWaele2016}. Because the calculation 
of the SEE yield is sensitive to the vacuum level, the difficulty in 
accurately determining the work function adds another challenge to the 
calculation the ion-induced emission coefficient $\gamma$. \\ 
 
\begin{table}[ht] 
\centering 
\captionsetup{width=0.9\textwidth}
\caption{Calculated yield $\gamma$, compared with the experimental values of 
Hagstrum ($\gamma_{exp}$)~\cite{Hagstrum1960}. The fraction $f_{c}$ of the 
contribution of the electron cascade process to the total yield, expressed as 
a percentage, as well as the calculated yield $\gamma_\phi$ using the experimental work 
function are also tabulated.} 
\label{quotas:tab-yield_semiconductors}  
\renewcommand{\arraystretch}{1.3} 
\begin{tabular}{c @{\hskip 2em} c @{\hskip 2em} c @{\hskip 2em} c @{\hskip 
2em} c @{\hskip 2em} c} 
\hline 
Surface & Ion & $\gamma$ & $f_{c} (\%)$ & $\gamma_\phi$ & $\gamma_{exp}$ 
\\\hline 
\ce{Ge(111)} & \ce{He^+} & 0.205 & 41 & 0.156 & 0.196 \\ 
		      & \ce{Ne^+} & 0.125 & 28 & 0.102 & 0.138 \\ 
\ce{Si(111)} & \ce{He^+} & 0.166 & 32 & 0.176 & 0.188 \\ 
		      & \ce{Ne^+} & 0.100 & 22 & 0.106 & 0.128 \\\hline 
\end{tabular} 
\end{table} 
 
In order to determine the contribution of the electron cascade process, 
Fig.~\ref{quotas:fig-results_semiconductors} also shows the yield spectrum of 
the initial neutralization step, i.e. without adding any of the escaped 
electrons due to electron cascades. For all of the ion-surface combinations, 
the electron cascades increase the number of low energy electrons 
substantially. Hence, by considering electron cascades, we can obtain the 
missing low energy electrons in Hagstrum's original approach, without 
introducing a large anisotropy in the initial direction of the excited 
electrons. If we look at the fraction $f_c$ of the contribution of the 
electron cascades to the final SEE yield 
(Table~\ref{quotas:tab-yield_semiconductors}), we can see that on average 
approximately 31\% of the total yield is a result of electron cascade process. 
Moreover, the contribution is higher for \ce{Ge} than for \ce{Si}, most likely 
due to the larger band gap of \ce{Si}, which results in a larger minimum 
energy loss for the scattered electrons. The higher value of $f_c$ for 
\ce{He^+} impact compared to \ce{Ne^+} is because the larger ionization energy 
of \ce{He^+} allows for more iterations in the electron cascade process. 
 
However, when the high energy tail of the the yield spectrum is reproduced 
accurately, the model still underestimates the yield spectra. This can in part 
be explained by the anisotropy of the system caused by the incoming ion, which 
means that the distribution of the direction of the wave vectors 
$P_\Omega(\varepsilon)$ is most likely not fully isotropic. This was 
Hagstrum's motivation for introducing the $\alpha$ and $\beta$ parameters, in 
order to skew the direction of the excited electrons towards the surface. Our 
results indicate that Hagstrum most likely overestimated the anisotropy when 
fitting these parameters, as he did not consider the contribution of the 
electron cascades to the yield spectrum. However, the fact that we adopt an 
isotropic distribution could explain the underestimation of the yield in the 
results. Second, considering the matrix elements to be constant means that we 
treat all electronic energy levels on an equal footing. It is possible that 
including the calculation of the matrix elements could result in an increased 
participation of high energy electrons in the Auger neutralization, producing 
excited electrons with higher average energies. This extra energy would be 
passed on in the cascade process and hence result in an increase of the 
overall yield. The fact that our results match fairly well with experiment, 
however, is an indication that such effect would likely be small, and that 
considering the matrix elements to be constant is a reasonable approximation 
for \ce{Ge} and \ce{Si}. 
 
\section{Metals} \label{quotas:sec-metals} 
 
So far, I have only considered semiconductors in the discussion of Hagstrum's 
model, as well as our adjustments. However, it is possible to extend the model 
to metals without having to significantly change the expressions of 
Sec.~\ref{quotas:sec-see} by simply redefining the valence states density 
$D_v(\varepsilon)$ as the density of the occupied states of the metal and 
$D_c(\varepsilon)$ as the density of the unoccupied states. For metals then, 
$\varepsilon_c = \varepsilon_v = \varepsilon_F$, with $\varepsilon_F$ the 
Fermi level and $\chi$ in Eq.~\ref{quotas:eq-refraction} becomes the work 
function $\phi$. 
 
However, it is well established that plasmon excitations play an important 
role in the interaction of ions and metallic surfaces~\cite{Baragiola1996, 
Baragiola2001, Baragiola2007}, so any attempt to calculate $\gamma$ for metals 
has to include a suitable implementation of these collective electron excitations at
the surface. This also becomes clear when comparing our results 
for \ce{He+} and \ce{Ne+} incident on \ce{Mg(100)} with the experimental 
result of Baragiola and Dukes~\cite{Baragiola1996} in 
Fig.~\ref{quotas:fig-he_mg_noplasmon}. The experimental yield spectrum is 
severely overestimated, especially at higher energies. Both experimental 
spectra also present a rather distinct feature: above $\varepsilon_k \approx 
7-8$~\si{\electronvolt} there is a plateau in the yield spectrum for both 
\ce{He+} and \ce{Ne+}, which is not reproduced by our model. 

\pgfplotsset{every axis/.style={ 
	scale=0.9, font=\sffamily, 
	legend style={font=\small\sffamily, fill opacity=0.8, text opacity=1}} 
	} 
\begin{figure}[ht] 
    \centering 
    \captionsetup{width=0.9\textwidth}
    \begin{subfigure}[t]{0.49\textwidth} 
        \centering 
        \input{./figures/quotas/HeMg_noplasmon.tex} 
        \vspace{-1em} 
        \caption{} 
    \end{subfigure}% 
    ~  
    \begin{subfigure}[t]{0.49\textwidth} 
        \centering 
        \input{./figures/quotas/NeMg_noplasmon.tex} 
        \vspace{-1em} 
        \caption{} 
    \end{subfigure} 
\caption{Comparison of the experimental secondary electron yield distribution 
with the calculated ones for \ce{He+} (left) and \ce{Ne+} (right) incident on 
\ce{Mg(100)}, without the inclusion of plasmonic effects.} 
\label{quotas:fig-he_mg_noplasmon} 
\end{figure} 
 
\resultsubsection{Plasmons \label{quotas:sec-plasmons}}{https://github.com/mbercx/phd-thesis/tree/master/jupyter/quotas\#plasmons}{metals} 
 
We consider two mechanisms for inducing plasmonic excitations in our model. 
The first, surface resonance excitation, is introduced as a competing process 
for the Auger neutralization. The model for semiconductors 
considers the excess energy of the neutralization of every incoming ion to always
result in the excitation of a single electron. There are, however, other 
processes that are in direct competition with the Auger mechanism. First, the 
released energy can produce a photon which is subsequently emitted from the 
material. However, this radiative process is considered negligible for low ion 
energies~\cite{Almulhem1989}. More important are collective charge density 
oscillations, i.e. plasmon excitations, first considered as a potential competing 
excitation mechanism by Apell~\cite{Apell1988}. Other theoretical 
work also confirms the importance of plasmon mechanisms for the ion 
neutralization process~\cite{Almulhem1989, Monreal1995, VicenteAlvarez1998}.  

However, considering the electronic structure of \ce{Mg} in Fig.~\ref{quotas:fig-plasmons}~(a), a resonant 
excitation mechanism alone is not sufficient to explain the experimental 
electron energy distribution of $\ce{He^+}$ on \ce{Mg} in 
Fig.~\ref{quotas:fig-he_mg_noplasmon}. The highest energy electrons in the 
excited spectrum are produced by electrons near the Fermi energy. The plasmon 
energy of Mg is approximately 10.6~\si{\electronvolt}, and the work function 
$\phi = 3.64~\si{\electronvolt}$. For a singly charged $\ce{He^+}$ 
ion, the ionization energy is $E_I = 22.58~\si{\electronvolt}$. If the electrons close 
to the Fermi level in Mg are the ones to neutralize the incoming ion, an 
energy of up to 18.94 eV is released. Since the width of the density of 
occupied states is $\Delta \varepsilon_{v} = 6.96~\si{\electronvolt}$, the 
lowest energy released by the ion neutralization is $E_I - \Delta\varepsilon_{v} - \phi = 11.98~\si{\electronvolt}$. 
If the plasmon activity is only described by a resonant 
process, we expect very few plasmon excitations, even if the plasmon 
resonance peak is significantly broadened by the short plasmon lifetime.

There is, however, a second plasmon excitation mechanism which is not 
resonant in its nature. As the excited electrons travel through the material, 
they leave behind a wake of electron density fluctuations, leading to the 
possibility of energy loss through volume plasmon excitations in case the 
electrons have sufficient energy~\cite{Ritchie1957}. This excitation process does not have a 
resonance condition, i.e. as long as the excess electron energy is above the 
plasmon energy, the electron can excite a plasmon, losing energy in the process 
~\cite{Baragiola2001}.

\pgfplotsset{every axis/.style={scale=1}}
\begin{figure}[ht] 
    \centering 
    \captionsetup{width=0.9\textwidth}
    \begin{subfigure}[t]{0.6\textwidth} 
        \centering 
        
        \input{./figures/quotas/surface_plasmon} 
        \caption{} 
    \end{subfigure}% 
    ~  
    \begin{subfigure}[t]{0.4\textwidth} 
        \centering 
        
        \input{./figures/quotas/volume_plasmon} 
        \caption{} 
    \end{subfigure} 
\caption{Energy diagrams of resonant surface (a) and volume plasmon (b) 
excitations. (a) also shows the DOS of \ce{Mg (110)}, with the energies 
aligned to the diagram.} 
\label{quotas:fig-plasmons} 
\end{figure} 
 
In order to include the plasmonic excitations in our model, we describe 
them as Poisson point processes~\cite{Egerton2009}, i.e. the intervals between events follow an 
exponential distribution~\cite{MITopencourseware}: 
\begin{equation} 
f_{T_p} (t) = \lambda_p e^{-\lambda_p t}, 
\end{equation} 
for a process $p$, i.e. volume plasmon excitation ($vp$), surface plasmon 
excitation ($sp$) or Auger neutralization ($aug$). The 
excitation rate of volume plasmons with energy $E_{vp}$ can be related to the 
dielectric function $\epsilon (\omega)$ through the volume loss function 
$L$~\cite{Raether1980}: 
\begin{eqnarray} 
\lambda_{vp}(E_{vp}) &\sim& L(E_{vp}) =
\text{Im}\left[-\frac{1}{\epsilon(E_{vp})}\right] \\
\lambda_{vp}(E_{vp}) &=& c_{vp} \cdot \text{Im}\left[-\frac{1}{\epsilon(E_{vp})}\right],
\end{eqnarray} 
where $c_{vp}$ is a proportionality constant.
Each of the possible energy losses $E_{vp}$ are considered as competing Poisson 
point processes. However, as the excited electron cannot wind up in an 
occupied state, it cannot lose more energy than its energy relative to the 
Fermi level $\varepsilon - \varepsilon_F$. Writing the average travel 
interval of the excited electrons as $t_e$, the probability for an electron at 
energy $\varepsilon$ of exciting a plasmon with energy $E_{vp} < \varepsilon - 
\varepsilon_F$ is (see Appendix~\ref{sec:appendix-poisson}): 
\begin{eqnarray} \label{quotas:eq-vp_prob}
P_{vp}(\varepsilon, E_{vp}) dE_{vp} &=& \frac{c_{vp} 
L(E_{vp})dE_{vp}}{\int_0^{\varepsilon - \varepsilon_F} c_{vp} L(E) dE
}\left[1-e^{-\left(\int_0^{\varepsilon - \varepsilon_F} c_{vp} L(E) dE\right) t_e 
}\right] \\ 
&=& \frac{L(E_{vp})dE_{vp}}{\int_0^{\varepsilon - \varepsilon_F} L(E) dE
}\left[1-e^{-\left(\int_0^{\varepsilon - \varepsilon_F} L(E) dE\right) c_{vp} t_e 
}\right] 
\end{eqnarray} 
The product $\kappa_v = c_{vp} \cdot t_e$, the combination of the prefactor of the 
rate $\lambda_{vp}$ and the average travel interval of the excited electrons, is a 
measure of the likelihood of plasmon excitations during the SEE process. We 
treat it as a parameter of the model. 
 
For the surface plasmons, a plasmon excitation can occur instead of a 
single-electron excitation when the energy released in the neutralization of 
the incoming ion is close to that of the surface plasmon. In order to determine the 
possibility of a surface plasmon excitation, both processes are once again 
modelled as Poisson point processes, i.e. by considering the exponential 
distributions
\begin{eqnarray} 
f_{T_{sp}}(E_{sp}, t) = \lambda_{sp} (E_{sp}) e^{-\lambda_{sp}(E_{sp}) t}\\ 
f_{T_{aug}}(t) = \lambda_{aug} e^{-\lambda_{aug} t}.
\end{eqnarray} 
The probability that the plasmon excitation will occur 
before the Auger Neutralization is then (see Appendix~\ref{sec:appendix-poisson}): 
\begin{equation} \label{quotas:eq-sp_poisson}
P_{sp}(E_{sp}) = \text{Pr}\{T_{sp} < T_{aug}\} = 
\frac{\lambda_{sp}(E_{sp})}{\lambda_{sp}(E_{sp}) + \lambda_{aug}} 
\end{equation} 
The surface plasmon excitation rate is calculated from the dielectric response of 
the surface using the surface energy loss function~\cite{Raether1980}: 
\begin{equation} 
\lambda_{sp}(E_{sp}) = c_{sp} \cdot \text{Im}\left[-\frac{1}{\epsilon(E_{sp}) 
+ 1}\right],
\end{equation} 
where $c_{sp}$ is once again a proportionality constant.
The expression for the probability of a plasmon 
excitation when an energy $E_{sp}$ is transfered to the incoming ion becomes: 
\begin{equation} \label{quotas:eq-sp_prob}
P_{sp}(E_{sp}) = \frac{c_{sp} \cdot \text{Im}\left[-\frac{1}{\epsilon(E_{sp}) + 
1}\right]}{c_{sp}  \cdot \text{Im}\left[-\frac{1}{\epsilon(E_{sp}) + 1}\right] + 
\lambda_{aug}} = \frac{ \frac{c_{sp}}{\lambda_{aug}} 
\text{Im}\left[-\frac{1}{\epsilon(E_{sp}) + 1}\right]}{\frac{c_{sp}}{\lambda_{aug}} 
\text{Im}\left[-\frac{1}{\epsilon(E_{sp}) + 1}\right] + 1} 
\end{equation} 
where the ratio $\kappa_s = c_{sp}/\lambda_{aug}$ is treated as a second parameter 
of the plasmon model\footnote{We take this ratio to be the parameter - instead 
of its inverse - so that the amount of plasmonic activity is directly 
proportional to the parameter, which is more intuitive. This also allows us to 
turn off surface plasmons by setting the parameter to zero.}. In this 
description, it is assumed that the Auger neutralization rates are similar 
for the various ion material combinations and independent of the energy 
transferred to the secondary electron. 
 
A more detailed derivation of Eqs.~(\ref{quotas:eq-vp_prob}) and 
(\ref{quotas:eq-sp_prob}) can be found in Appendix~\ref{appendix:sec-plasmons},
along with a description of the exact implementation of the plasmonic 
excitation in the model. In short, the surface plasmon excitation probability 
(Eq.~(\ref{quotas:eq-sp_prob})) is used to remove a fraction of the energy 
distribution passed to the valence electrons in the Auger neutralization. The 
implementation of the volume plasmon is more complicated, as an electron 
travelling to the surface can excite volume plasmons with a range of energies 
$E_{vp}$. Moreover, volume plasmons decay into single particle 
excitations~\cite{Maier2007}, and hence the spectrum of excited 
plasmons has to be considered for calculating a new distribution of excited 
electrons resulting from plasmon decay. 
 
\pgfplotsset{every axis/.style={scale=0.85, font=\sffamily,
legend style={font=\footnotesize\sffamily, 
fill opacity=0.8, text opacity=1}}} 
\begin{figure}[ht] 
    \centering 
    \captionsetup{width=0.9\textwidth}
    \begin{subfigure}[t]{0.49\textwidth} 
        \centering 
        \input{./figures/quotas/bulk_plasmon_inf.tex} 
        \caption{} 
    \end{subfigure}% 
    ~  
    \begin{subfigure}[t]{0.49\textwidth} 
        \centering 
        \input{./figures/quotas/surface_plasmon_inf.tex} 
        \caption{} 
    \end{subfigure} 
\caption{Influence of the volume (a)  and surface (b) plasmon parameter on the 
SEE spectra of Mg (100) and Be(001), respectively. The experimental data are 
taken from~\cite{Baragiola2001}.} 
\label{quotas:fig-plasmon_influence} 
\end{figure} 
 
Figure~\ref{quotas:fig-plasmon_influence} shows the influence of increasing 
the volume and surface plasmon parameters on the spectra of \ce{He+} incident 
on \ce{Mg(100)} and \ce{Be(001)} surfaces, respectively. As previously 
discussed, surface plasmons are unlikely to be excited during the neutralization 
of \ce{He+} on \ce{Mg}, so this allows us to isolate the influence of volume plasmons. 
Similarly, the large plasmon frequency of \ce{Be} 
(See Fig.~\ref{quotas:fig-energy_loss}) means that surface plasmons, 
having a lower frequency than volume plasmons, play a much larger role in the 
spectrum of \ce{Be}. For \ce{Mg}, volume 
plasmon excitations result in a large reduction of the yield spectrum at 
higher energies. By increasing the participation of volume plasmons through 
the parameter $\kappa_v$, we are able to match the experimental spectrum much 
more closely, largely reproducing the ``plateau'' feature a higher energies 
which was missing from our previous results. For the \ce{Be} spectrum, 
increasing surface plasmon resonances through $\kappa_v$ results in an overall 
reduction of the yield spectrum, most likely due to the broad plasmon peak in 
the surface energy loss function of \ce{Be} (Fig.~\ref{quotas:fig-energy_loss}). 

\begin{figure}[ht] 
\centering 
\captionsetup{width=0.9\textwidth}
\includegraphics[width=0.5\textwidth]{./figures/quotas/energy_loss.eps} 
\caption{Volume and surface energy loss functions of Al, Mg an Be, calculated 
from the dielectric function of the bulk system of each element.} 
\label{quotas:fig-energy_loss} 
\end{figure} 

Although it would be possible to fit the plasmon parameters $\kappa_v$  and 
$\kappa_s$ for each ion/surface combination, similar to how Hagstrum fitted 
the escape function parameters $\alpha$ and $\beta$, this would remove any 
predictive capability of the model. Hence, we have fitted a \textit{single} 
set of parameters to the available quantitative experimental 
data\footnote{Note that there are more experimental spectra available. I 
discuss the reason for their exclusion in the next section.} for \ce{He+} and 
\ce{Ne+} ions incident on \ce{Al} and \ce{Mg} from Baragiola et al.~\cite{Baragiola2001}, as well as 
Takeishi and Hagstrums results for \ce{Ni(111)}~\cite{Takeishi1965} and 
\ce{Cu(110)}~\cite{Hagstrum1966}. Unfortunately, as Baragiola et al. did not 
specify the surface orientation of each metal, we chose to compare the experimental result 
to an average of our calculated results. Based on an interactive jupyter 
notebook, we first explored the influence of the parameters on the calculated 
parameters for each surface in order to ascertain a reasonable range for the 
fitting procedure. Next, we take the difference of the experimental and 
calculated values for each experimental data point and sum over their absolute values for each spectrum, 
normalizing each to the number of experimental data points in order to give 
each spectrum the same weight. Based on this analysis, the optimal values for 
the plasmon parameters are $\kappa_v = 0.105$ and $\kappa_s = 1.55$. 

\resultsubsection{Comparison with experiment\label{quotas:sec-results_metals}}{https://github.com/mbercx/phd-thesis/tree/master/jupyter/quotas\#comparison-with-experiment-1}{metals} 
 
Now that the model plasmon parameters $\kappa_v$ and $\kappa_s$ are fixed, 
we first compare the calculated secondary electron emission spectra for the surfaces of 
the metals for which experimental spectra are available. The results for 
the work function and calculated yields are compared with the experimental 
values~\cite{DeWaele2016, Baragiola2001, Hagstrum1966} in 
Table~\ref{quotas:tab-metal_results}. The calculated work functions are fairly 
close to the experimental ones for most surfaces. For \ce{Be}, there is a 
significant difference in the calculated work function of the various 
surfaces. As was noted by Michaelson~\cite{Michaelson1977} and Green and 
Bauer~\cite{Green1978}, there has been some debate on the work function of 
\ce{Be}, for which both values around 4~\si{\electronvolt} and 5~\si{\electronvolt} have been 
reported. This may be related to the observed large spread in calculated work 
function values between the surfaces. 

There is also a good agreement between the calculated and experimental yield 
of \ce{He+} an \ce{Ne+} ions on \ce{Al}, \ce{Mg} and \ce{Ni}, both for 
the total yield as well as the yield spectra 
(Fig.~\ref{quotas:fig-metals_results1}). For \ce{Al}, our model tends to 
underestimate the total secondary electron emission. Comparing the full 
emission spectra, there is a feature of the experimental spectra that is 
missing in our computational results: the high energy tail of the spectrum. 
Hagstrum~\cite{Hagstrum1960} already investigated the influence of the kinetic 
energy on the spectrum of \ce{He+} on \ce{Ge(111)}, and found that increasing 
the kinetic energy of the ion leads to a broader tail of the spectrum at high 
energies. A similar result was found for \ce{Ne+} on \ce{Al} by Baragiola et 
al.~\cite{Baragiola1996}, who also demonstrated an overall gain in electron 
yield when the kinetic energy is increased. Hagstrum introduced a broadening 
in the Auger transform to simulate the kinetic effects, however, as the 
difference is rather minor, we simply stick to a general 
0.2~\si{\electronvolt} gaussian broadening of the yield spectra for visual 
purposes, similar to the spectra presented for \ce{Ge} and \ce{Si}.

In contrast with the results for \ce{Al} and \ce{Mg}, there is a much larger 
difference in the yield results for the surfaces of 
\ce{Be}~(Fig.~\ref{quotas:fig-metals_results2}), which can be expected 
considering the larger variation in the surface work function. Baragiola et 
al.~\cite{Baragiola2001} did not specify the \ce{Be} surface for their SEE results, which 
complicates the quantitative comparison of our computational results with 
experiment, and hence we did not include them in our fitting procedure for the 
plasmon parameters. Qualitatively, however, the overall shape of the \ce{He+} 
yield spectra are similar, and the yield of the (110) surface also matches 
well with the experimental results quantitatively. It is reassuring to see 
that a single set of plasmon parameters is able to reproduce a lot of varied 
experimental data adequately, which to some extent validates our approach in 
treating them as model parameters. 

\begin{table}[ht] 
\centering 
\renewcommand{\arraystretch}{1.3} 
\caption{Calculated work functions $\phi$ and SEE yields $\gamma$ for each of 
the surfaces, compared with the available experimental data. For the work 
function of \ce{Mg} and \ce{Be} we do not have specific data for each surface. 
Similarly, we only know the surface for the yield results of \ce{Cu} and 
\ce{Ni}.} 
\label{quotas:tab-metal_results} 
\begin{tabular}{c @{\hskip 1em} | @{\hskip 1em} c @{\hskip 1em} | @{\hskip 
1em}  c @{\hskip 1em} c @{\hskip 1em} | @{\hskip 1em}  c @{\hskip 2em}  c 
@{\hskip 1em} | @{\hskip 1em} c @{\hskip 2em} c} 
 Element & Surface & $\phi$ (\si{\electronvolt}) & $\phi_{exp}$ 
(\si{\electronvolt}) & $\gamma^{He}$ & $\gamma^{He}_{exp}$ & $\gamma^{Ne}$ & 
$\gamma^{Ne}_{exp}$ \\\hline 
\input{tables/quotas/metal_results.tex} 
\hline 
\end{tabular} 
\end{table} \clearpage
 
\begin{figure}[!ht]
    \centering 
    \captionsetup{width=0.9\textwidth}
    \begin{subfigure}[t]{0.49\textwidth} 
        \centering 
        \input{figures/quotas/HeAl_results.tex} 
    \end{subfigure}% 
    ~  
    \begin{subfigure}[t]{0.49\textwidth} 
        \centering 
        \input{figures/quotas/NeAl_results.tex} 
    \end{subfigure} 
    \begin{subfigure}[t]{0.49\textwidth} 
        \centering 
        \input{figures/quotas/HeMg_results.tex} 
    \end{subfigure}% 
    ~  
    \begin{subfigure}[t]{0.49\textwidth} 
        \centering 
        \input{figures/quotas/NeMg_results.tex} 
    \end{subfigure} 
    \begin{subfigure}[t]{0.49\textwidth} 
        \centering 
        \input{figures/quotas/HeNi_results.tex} 
    \end{subfigure}% 
    ~  
    \begin{subfigure}[t]{0.49\textwidth} 
        \centering 
        \input{figures/quotas/NeNi_results.tex} 
    \end{subfigure} 
    \caption{\label{quotas:fig-metals_results1} Experimental and calculated 
yield spectra for incoming \ce{He^+} and \ce{Ne^+} ions on the chosen surfaces of \ce{Al}, \ce{Mg} and \ce{Ni}.} 
\end{figure} \clearpage 

\begin{figure}[!ht] 
    \centering 
    \captionsetup{width=0.9\textwidth}
    \begin{subfigure}[t]{0.49\textwidth} 
        \centering 
        \input{figures/quotas/HeBe_results.tex} 
    \end{subfigure}% 
    ~  
    \begin{subfigure}[t]{0.49\textwidth} 
        \centering 
        \input{figures/quotas/NeBe_results.tex} 
    \end{subfigure} 
    \begin{subfigure}[t]{0.49\textwidth} 
        \centering 
        \input{figures/quotas/HeCu_results.tex} 
    \end{subfigure}% 
    ~  
    \begin{subfigure}[t]{0.49\textwidth} 
        \centering 
        \input{figures/quotas/NeCu_results.tex} 
    \end{subfigure} 
    \begin{subfigure}[t]{0.49\textwidth} 
        \centering 
        \input{figures/quotas/HeW_results.tex} 
    \end{subfigure}% 
    ~  
    \begin{subfigure}[t]{0.49\textwidth} 
        \centering 
        \input{figures/quotas/NeW_results.tex} 
    \end{subfigure} 
    \caption{\label{quotas:fig-metals_results2} Experimental and calculated 
yield spectra for incoming \ce{He^+} and \ce{Ne^+} ions on the chosen surfaces of \ce{Be}, \ce{Cu} and \ce{W}.} 
\end{figure} \clearpage 
 
For \ce{Cu(110)}, the total yield is quite close to the experimental value, 
but the spectrum shape differs quite significantly from the experimental one, 
independently of the choice of plasmon parameters. As discussed in 
Section~\ref{quotas:sec-hagstrum}, the Auger neutralization rate 
$\lambda_{aug}$ can depend significantly on the electronic state ($s$, $p$, 
$d$)~\cite{Goebl2011}. In fact, Goebl et al. had specifically investigated the 
influence of the electron orbital on the neutralization rate for noble metals 
(\ce{Cu}, \ce{Ag} and \ce{Au}, and found that the rate due to $d$ electrons 
can be an order of magnitude higher compared to $s$ or $p$). In order to 
analyze whether this has a large effect on the yield, we implemented an input 
argument in the yield calculation that allows the user to give more weight to 
the $d$ orbitals in the neutralization of the incoming ion. However, as we can 
see in Fig.~\ref{quotas:fig-d_influence}, even when we increase the weight of 
the $d$-orbitals by an order of magnitude, the influence on the final yield 
spectrum is negligible. Looking at the orbital projected density of states, 
this isn't surprising, as the electronic states close to the Fermi level 
already largely correspond to $d$ orbitals. Currently, it is unclear as to why 
there is such a discrepancy between the calculated and experimental yield 
distributions of \ce{Cu(110)}. 

\begin{figure}[ht] 
    \centering 
    \captionsetup{width=0.9\textwidth}
    \begin{subfigure}[t]{0.49\textwidth} 
        \centering 
        \input{figures/quotas/d_influence.tex} 
    \end{subfigure}% 
    ~  
    \begin{subfigure}[t]{0.49\textwidth} 
        \centering 
        \input{figures/quotas/Cu_110_pdos.tex} 
    \end{subfigure} 
    \caption{\label{quotas:fig-d_influence} Influence of increasing the 
likelihood of $d$-electrons neutralizing the incoming ion.} 
\end{figure} 

Note that for \ce{W}, the calculated spectrum is consistently lower than the 
experimental one from Hagstrum. At first glance, this seems to be related to 
the work function, as the position of the high energy tail is lower for the 
computational result. However, according to the results in 
Table~\ref{quotas:tab-metal_results}, the computational work functions are 
lower for each surface compared to experiment. A possible explanation is that 
the \ce{W} surface was contaminated during Hagstrum's measurement, lowering 
the effective work function. Because of this discrepancy, we did not consider 
\ce{W} when fitting the plasmon parameters. 

I end this section with a couple of notes. So far the discussion has been limited 
to \ce{He+} and \ce{Ne+} ions. For \ce{Ar+}, the calculated yield spectra 
are significantly lower than the experimental ones for most metals. This 
can be related to the fact that we do not consider resonance neutralization (RN)
(See Fig.~\ref{quotas:fig-auger}) in our calculations. Although Auger 
neutralization (AN) is believed to be the dominant process, neglecting RN 
can have a larger effect for ions with a lower ionization energy. 
To understand this, consider what happens when an electron first neutralizes
the incoming ion via a resonant tunneling process, and subsequently is excited
to an energy above the vacuum level via Auger De-excitation (AD). Compared 
to an electron that is excited inside the surface via AN, this electron is excited in 
the (approximately) spherical potential well of the ion. If the energy of the 
electron is higher than the vacuum level, the escape probability of this 
electron is much higher than that of an electron excited inside the surface. 
This difference in escape probabilities is especially large when the excited 
energy level is only slightly above the vacuum level, as in this case the 
excited electron in the surface can only escape in case its wave vector is 
directed almost straight at the surface.

For ions with a low ionization energy, a much larger fraction of the electrons 
are excited to an energy close to the vacuum level. If the electrons are 
excited via AN, their escape probability is low, especially when compared to 
RN+AD. Hence, even though only a small fraction of ions are neutralized via 
the latter process, the resulting electrons can make up a significant portion 
of the final electron yield. Although we could introduce the RN+AD process via 
another fitting parameter, it would be better to try and determine the 
likelihood of either process by calculating their rates for a model system as 
done by Goebl et al.~\cite{Goebl2011}. This is beyond the scope of this work.

\resultsubsection{High-throughput results\label{quotas:sec-high_throughput}}{https://github.com/mbercx/phd-thesis/tree/master/jupyter/quotas\#high-throughput-results}{metals} 

Although it is gratifying to see that our model is able to reproduce both the 
experimental SEE yield values and spectra of many elemental surfaces, the 
purpose of developing the model is to apply it to predict the yield of 
surfaces for which no experimental results are available. This section
presents a high throughput screening of a list of elemental surfaces 
spanning the periodic table, based on the workflow discussed in 
Section~\ref{automation:sec-surface}. As is described in that section, the 
calculation of the surface properties for our model input requires a choice of 
sufficient atomic layers and vacuum thickness. Fortunately, here we can rely
on the extensive testing of De Waele et al.~\cite{DeWaele2016}, instead of 
performing the necessary convergence tests ourselves. Based on the details 
provided in the supplemental material of their paper, we have calculated 
the required input\footnote{Note that this input cannot simply be extracted
from the output files of De Waele et al., as our model needs the density of 
states for a large number of unoccupied bands.} for our version of Hagstrum's 
model for all of the tabulated surfaces.
Using the model plasmon parameters from our fitting 
procedure, we have then calculated the total yield for \ce{He+} and \ce{Ne+}
for each surface. Figure~\ref{quotas:fig-He_yield_table} shows a map of the 
averaged total yield for \ce{He+} on the periodic table.  
 
The average yield of the group IA elements is excessively high. This is a 
result of the combination of the low work functions of the surfaces of these 
elements as well as their small width of the density of occupied states 
$D_v(\varepsilon)$. The latter increases the yield because the average energy 
of an electron is higher in case the electrons are all close to the Fermi 
level. Hence, due to these two properties, the electrons only have 
to overcome a relatively small barrier when trying to escape, and there are 
always relatively high energy electrons that participate in both the Auger 
neutralization and the electron scattering processes. Most likely, our model 
is rather optimistic in its treatment of the electron scattering, as it does 
not consider the depth of the scattering electrons, allowing them a chance 
to escape at every iteration. This results in 
an overestimation of the yield for these elements, as well as other elements 
with similar surface properties (\ce{Ca}, \ce{Y}, \ce{Sc}). 
  
\begin{figure}[ht] 
\centering 
\captionsetup{width=0.9\textwidth}
\includegraphics[width=\textwidth]{figures/quotas/He_yield_table.png} 
\caption{Average yield results for \ce{He+} ions on the surfaces of the 
studied elements.} 
\label{quotas:fig-He_yield_table} 
\end{figure} 

\begin{figure}[ht] 
\centering 
\captionsetup{width=0.9\textwidth}
\includegraphics[width=\textwidth]{figures/quotas/Ne_yield_table.png} 
\caption{Average yield results for \ce{Ne+} ions on the surfaces of the 
studied elements.} 
\label{quotas:fig-Ne_yield_table} 
\end{figure} 

On the other side of the periodic table, elements with full $d$ orbitals and 
only a couple of electrons in the $s$ and/or $p$ orbitals (group 11-13, 
excluding \ce{Al}) have a noticeably lower yield. This is connected to the 
electronic structure of these elements near the Fermi level. Fig.~\ref{quotas:fig-pdos} 
shows the projected DOS of \ce{Ni (100)}, \ce{Cu (100)} and \ce{Zn (100)}. 
For all of these surfaces, most of the occupied states near the Fermi level 
correspond to $d$ states. However, for \ce{Zn (100)} these 
lie significantly below the Fermi level, which means that the average energy of electrons that 
participate in the Auger neutralization and electron scattering processes is 
relatively low. This reduces the average energy of the excited electron, 
which results in a lower chance of escape and hence a lower yield. The electronic  structures of 
other elements with full $d$ orbitals is similar, resulting in a lower yield 
for groups 11-13. \ce{Cu}, and by extension \ce{Ag} and \ce{Au}, suffer from a
similar effect, but to a lesser extent because the 
the $d$ states are closer to the Fermi level. Finally, this also explains the relatively low results for \ce{He+} ions on \ce{K}, \ce{Sr} and \ce{Ba}. 

{
\pgfplotsset{every axis/.style={font=\sffamily, width=6cm, height=7cm,
legend style={font=\footnotesize\sffamily,
fill opacity=0.8, text opacity=1}}} 
\begin{figure}[ht] 
    \centering
    \captionsetup{width=0.9\textwidth}
    \begin{subfigure}[t]{0.33\textwidth} 
        \centering 
        \input{figures/quotas/Ni_100_pdos.tex}
    \end{subfigure}% 
    ~  
    \begin{subfigure}[t]{0.29\textwidth} 
        \centering 
        \input{figures/quotas/Cu_100_pdos.tex}
    \end{subfigure} 
    ~
    \begin{subfigure}[t]{0.29\textwidth}
        \centering 
        \input{figures/quotas/Zn_100_pdos.tex}  
    \end{subfigure}
    \caption{\label{quotas:fig-pdos}Projected density of states of \ce{Ni (100)}, \ce{Cu (100)} and \ce{Zn (100)}.} 
\end{figure}
}
 
The yield for \ce{Ne+} results in a reduction for the yield for most elements 
compared to \ce{He+}, which is to be expected considering the lower ionization 
energy of \ce{Ne+}. There are some notable exceptions, however, such as \ce{Sr}, \ce{Sn}, \ce{Pb} and \ce{Cs}. The first three can be explained by the fact that due to the lower 
ionization energy of \ce{Ne+}, the deep $d$ orbitals can no longer neutralize 
the incoming ion, which means that only the higher energy $s$ and $p$ electrons take 
part, resulting in a higher average energy of the excited Auger electrons. For \ce{He^+} 
on \ce{Cs}, there is an increased resonance between the energy released during the 
neutralization and the surface plasmon excitation.
Interesting here is also the low average yield value for \ce{Ne+} on \ce{K}. 
This is due to the fact that the $3p$ orbitals of \ce{K} are just barely able 
to neutralize the incoming ion, resulting in a large fraction of electrons in 
the excited density that are just above the vacuum level, and hence a severely 
reduced yield. 

So far, I have found no results in the literature where the yield of \ce{Ne+} 
is higher than \ce{He+} for an element. It is conceivable that these lower 
shell electrons have very little overlap between their wave function and that of 
the lowest occupied state of the incoming ion, resulting in a low likelihood 
of them neutralizing the ion. In this case, the participation of the higher 
energy $s$ and $p$ states increases the yield for \ce{He+} and can restore 
the expected trend. However, the same can be said 
about the $3d$ orbitals in \ce{Cu} compared to its $4s$ orbitals, and Goebl 
et al.~\cite{Goebl2011} found that the $d$ orbitals actually have a higher 
rate of neutralizing the ion. In future work, it might be interesting to supplement our model 
with rate calculations similar to those performed by Goebl et al. for other 
elements, so we can weigh the contribution of each orbital accordingly. 

{
\tikzset{every axis/.append style={font=\sffamily}} 
\begin{figure}[ht] 
\centering 
\captionsetup{width=\textwidth}
\input{\figurepath/quotas/wf_baragiola.tex}
\caption{(\textbf{a}) Calculated yields of all surfaces versus their work function. The 
regular data, including our model for the plasmonic excitations, is shown in 
red. For comparison, we have also added the results without plasmonic effects 
($\kappa_v = \kappa_s = 0$) in blue. Calculated (\textbf{b}) and experimental (\textbf{c}) secondary electron yields compared to the fit of Baragiola et al.~\cite{Baragiola1979}. The experimental values are tabulated in Table~\ref{quotas:tab-metal_results}. For materials where we do not know the surface of the corresponding yield result, we have plotted one datapoint for each experimental work function value.} 
\label{quotas:fig-versus_workfun} 
\end{figure}
}
 
Figure~\ref{quotas:fig-versus_workfun}(a) plots the calculated yield for 
each surface versus its work function, for both the model with and without 
plasmons. It is clear that the plasmons have a significant influence on the 
yield for most materials. The work function also has an important influence on 
the yield, which is to be expected, however we also find that for a single 
value of the work function there can be a wide range of yields. The fact that 
this is true for both the results with and without plasmons indicates that 
this is not simply a consequence of the electronic response of the material, 
but most likely due to differences in the density of states of the various 
surfaces. 

Finally, we compare both our calculated yield spectra and workfunctions, as 
well as the experimental results tabulated in 
Table~\ref{quotas:tab-metal_results}, with an empirical fit from Baragiola 
et al.~\cite{Baragiola1979} in Fig.~\ref{quotas:fig-versus_workfun}(b) and (c). It 
is clear that for surfaces with higher work functions (left side of the figure), 
our calculated yields lie consistently below Baragiola's fit. This is also the case for most experimental data, however, with the sole exception of tungsten, for which we observed a significant discrepancy between our calculated spectra and the experimental ones in Section~\ref{quotas:sec-results_metals}. For surfaces with lower work functions (right side of Figs.~\ref{quotas:fig-versus_workfun}(b-c)), the calculated yield can be significantly higher than the value corresponding to Baragiola's fit. This is another indication that our model overestimates the yield of these surfaces. Besides the results of Hagstrum, Baragiola et al. relied on the results of Oechsner~\cite{Oechsner1978} and Arifov~\cite{Arifov1969}. The former, however, used \ce{Ar^+} ions with a kinetic energy of 1~\si{\kilo\electronvolt}, which can significantly increase the electron yield compared to relatively slow ions (4-100~\si{\electronvolt}). As our model does not consider kinetic mechanisms in the calculation of the yield, this could be one explanation as to why our results lie below Baragiola's fit. Moreover, considering the importance of plasmon excitations, and the highly material dependent energy loss spectra in Fig.~\ref{quotas:fig-energy_loss}. It seems unlikely that an accurate electron yield can be obtained from a linear fit relying solely on the ionization energy $E_I$ and work function $\phi$.
 
\clearpage
\section{Conclusions and outlook} 

Starting from Hagstrum's model, I have presented a method for calculating the 
SEE yield of incoming ions on semiconductor surfaces, and have applied it to 
incident \ce{He+} and \ce{Ne+} ions on the (111) surface of \ce{Ge} and 
\ce{Si}. Determining the required input using \textit{ab initio} DFT 
calculations, as well as using a different expression for the escape function, 
removes the parameters Hagstrum used in his model. Furthermore, introducing 
electron cascades recovers the low energy electrons missing in the initial spectra,
without the introduction of new parameters. Using this approach, our model is 
able to produce spectra that match closely to experiment for \ce{Ge (111)} and 
\ce{Si (111)}, both in shape as well as the total calculated yield.

For metals, we have extended the model with an implementation of plasmonic 
excitations. Here, the model makes a distinction between surface and volume 
plasmons, both of which play an important role in the secondary electron emission 
process. The calculated spectra match reasonably well with experiment, but there 
are some discrepancies, e.g. for \ce{Cu} and \ce{W}. Moreover, when applying the 
model to group I-II elemental surfaces, the calculated yield is very high, and 
most likely an overestimation. Finally, due to the electronic structure of the 
surface, it is possible that for some elements the calculated yield is lower 
for \ce{He+} than \ce{Ne+}, despite the higher ionization energy of \ce{He+}. Such 
a trend has so far not been observed in the literature.

Although the electron cascades are an important process that allows our model
to retrieve the low energy electrons missing in Hagstrum's original model, it 
is possible that our idealistic representation of the process overestimates 
the number of cascading electrons that contribute to the total yield. For many 
elements, this overestimation can be balanced by the fact that we use an isotropic 
distribution for the wave vector of the excited electron. Hagstrum was right to
consider the distribution to be more skewed along the normal of the surface, but 
most likely overemphasized this effect in order to obtain sufficient electrons
at low energy. In our case, the fully isotropic distribution means that every 
excited electron has a lower chance to escape than in Hagstrum's case. This is
also true for the I-II group elements, but here the idealistic electron cascades 
implementation combined with the low work function of their surfaces 
results in a far greater overestimation.

Calculating accurate SEE yield coefficients from first principles is a 
challenging undertaking, both due to the complexity of the processes involved, 
as well as their sensitivity to the vacuum level. The model in its current state 
offers a pragmatic and effective approach for calculating yield spectra, but 
can still benefit from several improvements. First, using an approach similar to 
Goebl et al.~\cite{Goebl2011} to calculate transition rates for atomic orbitals 
can be used to weigh the participation of $s$, $p$ and $d$ electrons. Moreover, if 
it is possible to extend such calculations to the comparison of the Auger- and resonant
neutralization process, it can allow us to include the resonant mechanism in our 
calculation without introducing more parameters. Second, both 
the implementation of the electron cascades and the plasmonic excitations can be 
improved by including the wave vector of the electron in the 
calculation. Finally, the ionization energy can be better described by considering 
a range of energies that depend on the distance of the ion to the surface when it 
is neutralized. However, this requires an accurate function for both the ionization 
energy as well as the probability of neutralization versus the distance. 
 
\printbibliography 
\end{refsection} 
